Research Summary, Spring 2020

Md Muhtasim Billah, WSU ID: 11648176


I have been working on one of the multiple research interests pursued by Dr. Jin Liu’s research group which can be titled as “The Transcytosis of Bioparticle through Blood Brain Barrier”. Blood brain barrier (BBB) is a biological barrier raised by the tight junctions located between the endothelial cells (constitutes the inner layer of the blood vessels) while trying to deliver drugs from the blood to the brain. One way of overcoming this barrier is transcytosis. It’s a process by which the bioparticle travels through cells rather than trying to find its way through the intercellular space. The main objective of my PhD research, as of yet, is to develop and implement a preexisting model to study the physiochemical parameters that influence this biological process.

Transcytosis can be divided into Endocytosis and Exocytosis. Endocytosis is the first step of transcytosis that includes the bioparticle attachment with the cell via ligand-receptor interaction, membrane budding, vesicle formation and finally scission of the vesicle from inner leaflet of apical cell membrane. Exocytosis is the second step that includes the vesicle docking on the inner leaflet of the basal cell membrane, vesicle fusion and finally the expulsion of the bioparticle to the brain side. The stochastic model for the transcytosis process was developed based on Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm. Using this model, several parameters have been studied which led to journal publications. Over the period of last one year, I have focused on acquiring better insights about this numerical model by going through these published articles along with the computer programs written in Fortran and C++. Later, I performed numerous test-runs for understanding the entire simulation process- the parameter setups, the inputs and outputs, post processing, and analyzing the results. Upon completion of this primary task, being convinced, my supervisor directed me towards studying a few more parameters before making any major modification to the existing code. To start with, I concentrated on the receptor flexural rigidity, a physical property of the receptor expressed on the cell membrane surface. Upon studying this parameter, interesting characteristics were discovered which would be very exhaustive to investigate experimentally. No literature was reported to study this parameter before and thus a scope for publication remains regarding this. The simulations have finished running and the data post processing has been done in Summer 2019.

While transcytosis is extremely important for particle transport via BBB, endocytosis, the first step of transcytosis, alone plays crucial role in several biological phenomena. One of the most important ones is the virus entry to the cell. Among many endocytic pathways, the receptor mediated endocytosis (RME) is the most common one and is almost always accompanied by the coat protein clathrin. But, merely three decades ago, researchers discovered that there are other endocytic pathways that does not involve clathrin and this new finding lead to a novel line of research later on. The numerical model, though originally built to study clathrin mediated endocytosis (CME), can also be modified to simulate clathrin independent endocytosis (CIE). My next topic of interest, as advised by Dr. Liu, was to investigate how the model behaves for CIE and whether it gives us any insights about other relevant parameters. Working along that line, I have run numerous simulations for studying two key parameters for both CME and CIE. These two parameters are the receptor length and the reaction cutoff distance between the ligand and receptor. I was privileged to present the findings from this work in the Division of Fluid Dynamics (DFD) Meeting arranged by American Physical Society (APS) in November 2019. I have worked on this topic furthermore and put together a manuscript which now awaits reviews from my supervisor. Upon his approval, with possible minor adjustments, the manuscript will soon be ready to be submitted in a peer reviewed scientific journal where I will be the first author.

My next research goal would be making further major modification to the current model to study more parameters that affect the transcytosis process. Though I have started working on it from the Summer of 2019, it was temporarily put aside for focusing more on attending the APS DFD Meeting and preparing the manuscript for journal. While I am preparing to take my Preliminary Exam this April, I am also working on my next possible task which is studying the effects of charged particle on transcytosis. It has been proven via experimental studies that positively charged particles tend to adopt faster endocytosis into the negatively charged cell membrane. To study this behavior, I am working on adapting the existing model by incorporating Ewald Summation method. I hope to finish this by Fall 2020.

